---
title: "Reading the Cashflow Statement"
lesson: 15
groupTitle: "Fundamental Analysis"
group: 4
difficulty: 1
importance: 2
---

## Reading the Cash Flow Statement

### Cash Flow Growth
The first thing to consider on the cash flow statement is the change in cash flow over time. You want to see that the business is generating more cash over time, and that cash is coming from operations rather than investing or financing.

Ideally, investing and financing cash flows are negative, indicating the business is expanding and returning capital to lenders and shareholders. One or two periods of positive investing or financing cash flows are fine, but anything further would be considered a red flag.

### Price to Free Cash Flow (FCF) Ratio

> Price to Free Cash Flow (FCF) Ratio = Share Price / Free Cash Flow per Share

The price to free cash flow ratio is a valuation ratio just like the PE ratio, except it compares share price to free cash flow.

The advantage of the price to free cash flow ratio over the PE ratio is that it is based on the actual cash generated by the core business, after accounting for capital expenditure. As we know, the PE ratio is based on net income which includes non-cash items and one-time or non-recurring events, which can be misleading as to actual profitability.

The price to free cash flow ratio can be used in all the same ways as the PE ratio. However, the difference between sectors can be more pronounced than the PE ratio. Some sectors, such as mining and industrials, require large amounts of fixed assets to operate, meaning capital expenditure is greater and free cash flow is lower. Other sectors, like technology, require very little fixed assets so free cash flow is higher.

### Cash Flow Margin

> Cash Flow Margin = Operating Cash Flow / Revenue

The cash flow margin is a profitability metric, like the profit margin. It represents how much cash the business generates for every $1 it makes in revenue.

Again, the advantage of this ratio over its accrual-based counterpart is that it is cash-based and only includes cash flows from the core operations.

### Cash Flow Coverage Ratio

> Cash Flow Coverage Ratio = Operating Cash Flow / Total Debt

The cash flow coverage ratio is an extremely effective measure of financial health. It measures the company's debt level by comparing it to how much cash is generated by core operations. This is an effective measure because, unlike accrual-based measures like current assets, cash is what the company actually uses to pay back debt.

The higher the cash flow coverage ratio the better. A ratio above 1.0 indicates the company could pay off all of its debt in one period from just its core operations. In fact, taking the reciprocal provides a figure that represents how many periods it would take to pay off all debt. For example, a ratio of 0.5 indicates it would take a minimum of two periods (1 / 0.5 = 2) to pay off all debt.

## Summary of Key Concepts
- Cash is required to meet immediate obligations, invest in growth opportunities, and maintain operational efficiency. Therefore, understanding where it comes from is vital to assessing financial health.
- Various non-cash items, such as D&A, that appear on the income statement cause net income to not necessarily equal cash flow.